# Principles of Translation

The translation of Ms. Fr. 640 was carried out by graduate students and
Making and Knowing team members in Paleography and Text Workshops held
by the Making and Knowing Project from 2014 to 2018. It was then checked
and refined by the Paleography Lead Marc Smith and Senior Editorial Team
members, Clement Godbarge, Naomi Rosenkranz, Pamela Smith, Tillmann
Taape, and Tianna Uchacz.

There is no such thing as a perfect translation. It is always a
compromise, requiring interpretation and judgment, shaped by the
translator’s aims and priorities. Discerning the intended meaning of the
author-practitioner of Ms. Fr. 640 was particularly challenging because
it is a technical text containing many obscure and long-forgotten
materials and techniques, as well as because the author-practitioner
seems to have left the manuscript unfinished.

Any of the numerous moving parts of a sentence—obscure nouns, vague
adverbs, knotty subclauses, sequences of tenses and moods—might hold
crucial clues to the success of a complex (and often unknown or lost)
process. Furthermore, the process of translation was carried out by
successive cohorts of students and team members in Paleography and Text
Workshops who generally had no special expertise in the obscure contents
of the manuscript. We translated collectively and in parallel with
laboratory reconstruction and textual research to interpret the text.
The translation underwent multiple campaigns of revision. Our
translation of Ms. Fr. 640 aims to avoid over-interpretation and
maintain ambiguity, providing as literal and consistent a rendering of
the original French as possible. This frequently meant foregoing a more
elegant solution in favor of a clunky and at times archaic rendering
which preserves the author-practitioners rich, down-to-earth, and
occasionally rambling vernacular.

This “hands-off” approach applies first and foremost to technical terms.
Many sixteenth-century terms for processes and materials have been
obscured or subsumed into different categories in modern art historical
terminology. To keep the original meaning in view, we have refrained
from applying these modern categories wherever possible. For example,
the term *desmenée* in an entry on perspective (fol.
[62v](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios/62v/f/62v/tl))
could easily be identified as the “vanishing point,” but instead we
opted for the more neutral “intersection.” Similarly, the entries on *or
mat* (fol.
[66r](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios/66r/f/66r/tl))
describe a process known as mordant gilding in modern English, but to
use that term would be tantamount to imposing a modern technical
definition on the author-practitioner’s understanding of the process.
Technical terms for pigments and other materials were a particular
challenge. The identity of *azur d’esmail* and a range of related blue
pigments in the manuscript has been an ongoing conundrum. Although we
are fairly confident, after extensive research and consultation with
experts over many years, that it refers to smalt, a blue glass
containing cobalt, we are reluctant to impose our conclusions on the
text. For this reason, *azur d’esmail*, *or mat*, and a range of other
terms have been left in the original French, with an editorial note
detailing the state of our research as to their identity.

For many French terms, we chose English translations from contemporary
dictionaries such as Cotgrave’s 1611 *Dictionarie of the French and
English Tongues*, even if they might seem obscure or archaic to modern
readers (see below the full list of dictionaries used). Even if a word
such as “mattrass,” denoting a round-bottomed glass flask, is now rarely
used, it is by far the closest equivalent, both etymologically and in
terms of its technical meaning, to the French *mattelas*. There are
cases, however, where this strategy would have caused more confusion
that it is worth. The small paintbrush called *pinceau*, for example,
would have been known as a “pencil” in English from the sixteenth until
well into the nineteenth century. Being moreover etymologically related
to *pinceau*, “pencil” seems in many ways an ideal candidate. However,
while one might find a “camel hair pencil” in a catalogue of specialist
art equipment even today, the danger of confusing a brush with a
graphite pencil seemed too grave to be left to a disambiguating
editorial note on each instance of the word. Instead, on this occasion
we translated “paintbrush,” prioritising a clear reference to the
correct tool over the principle of avoiding modern categories.

Another important aim of our translation was to preserve the
peculiarities of the author-practitioner’s language. This includes the
odd not-quite-grammatical sentence, but, more importantly, the
author-practitioner’s language of things and processes, which is one of
the key elements that tell us something about his “material imaginary.”
We paid particular attention to language describing materials as alive
and active, with a will of their own. *Azur d’esmail*, for example,
“hates more than any other to be ground, especially with water,” and
with good reason, since this would mean that it “dies & loses all its
color” (fol.
[58v](http://edition640.makingandknowing.org/#/folios/58v/f/58v/tl)).
While this literal translation may sound quaint to modern readers, for
early modern artists and artisans, there would have been nothing unusual
in supposing that matter was a live agent that had to be coaxed or
subdued into the service of human artifice. By preserving the
agency—grammatical and semantic—of materials as well as humans and
animals, our translation aims to immerse the reader in the
author-practitioner’s words and world.

The entire translation was collaborative, and this was a challenge to
the consistency of translation. We therefore developed protocols to try
to limit the range of translations. This, too, can add to awkwardness in
phrasing, but we very much strove for a unified voice over the entire
manuscript—a goal, it must be said, that is somewhat at odds with the
nature of this compiled document. Consistency in translation of material
and process terms was also sought by compiling a glossary over the five
years of Text Workshops that specified to participants what word the
Project had settled on to translate certain oft-repeated words. This
formed the basis of the Glossary that is now available as one of the
pane views of the Edition. Editorial Team members then further enforced
this consistency by searching for commonly used terms or phrases in a
text editing program to make sure that they were translated with the
agreed-upon term. For example, we reviewed hundred of variations of the
construction *il faut*, determining how to implement our self-imposed
consistency rules (“one needs (to do),” “one ought not,” or “it is
necessary,” depending on context) or depart from them in edge cases. The
exhilarating but alarming capacity that digital tools allow in enforcing
consistency in a document like this has resulted in a non-literary piece
of literature, as we consciously sacrificed elegance of prose in the
English for a literal rendering and an attempt not to over-interpret
passages whose meaning was unclear.

It must also be noted that the Making and Knowing Project created a
critical edition of a French manuscript with a research apparatus that
is mostly in English, which leads to a somewhat peculiar feature of
providing Editorial Comments across all three versions of the text, as
well as clarifications of meaning in Research Essays mostly only in
English. The advantage of the English translation, however, is that it
can serve as a form of index for the French versions of the text because
it contains single terms, whereas the French transcriptions contain many
variant spellings. Thus, if the reader wishes to search for a single
word, e.g., a type of material, the search can be undertaken in English,
and compared to the French variants.

All author additions and deletions, as well as Making and Knowing
editorial corrections to the text were carried across and made visible
in all three versions of the text. We thought it useful to the reader to
see where the author-practitioner had rethought passages no matter which
version was being read. When it was possible to translate the deleted
words and phrases, we did so in the translation. Where a deleted word
was fragmentary and could not be translated, it was left in French,
indicated by italicized font, but this means there are sometimes word
fragments of words interpolated into sentences and even other words.
They are however always visible as deletions by the struck-through red
font.

Finally, our translation was further constrained by the need to keep
encoding matched as much as possible across all three versions of the
text. This is desirable because it ensures matching data sets across all
versions of the text, allowing for digital analysis of the Project’s
data. While our translation is faithful to the original and, we hope,
useful for researchers from different disciplines, it can in some places
be challenging at first read. Our edition provides three different aids
to guide the reader across the rockier linguistic territory. Editorial
Comments, signalled by a red asterisk, contain information about the
historical context and translation decisions. The Glossary found on the
reading pane menus provides an alphabetical and searchable list of
distinctive terms used in Ms. Fr. 640 that the team identified as
needing individual definition, providing citations of source(s)
supporting our translation decisions. The Research Essays that accompany
this edition often explore linguistic particularities and the
interpretation of meaning.

For more information on the process by which Ms. Fr. 640 was translated,
see Soersha Dyon and Heather Wacha, Turning Turtle: The Process of
Translating BnF Ms. Fr. 640.

For the reference sources used in translation, please see Appendix
below.

## APPENDIX

## Resources used in transcribing and translating the Edition

### **VOCABULAIRE -** RESSOURCES EN LIGNE

#### Traduction français-anglais

  - > [Randle Cotgrave, Dictionarie of the French and English
    > Tongues](http://www.micmap.org/dicfro/introduction/cotgrave)
    > (London 1611).
    
      - > Aussi ici:
        > [http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/cotgrave/](http://www.pbm.com/%7Elindahl/cotgrave/)

  - > Claudius Hollyband, A Dictionarie French and English (London 1593)

  - > Guy Miège, *[A New Dictionary French and
    > English](https://books.google.com/books?id=YbWtTwVbLioC&printsec=frontcover&dq=guy+miege&hl=en&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwih-ZStta7mAhVhmeAKHW9QCjQQ6AEwAHoECAYQAg#v=onepage&q&f=false)*
    > (London, 1677).

  - > [Linguee](http://www.linguee.com/english-french) French-English
    > translation tool with texts showing usage (contemporary)

  - > [Abel Boyer, The Royal Dictionary, French and
    > English](http://books.google.fr/books?id=2-_J6e9af1EC)…, (London
    > 1729).

  - > [Oxford English Dictionary](http://www.oed.com/) - The standard
    > reference. (institutional access required)

#### **Principaux dictionnaires historiques français** (accès libre)

  - > [Centre national de resources textuelles et
    > lexicales](http://www.cnrtl.fr/definition/) - DMF, TLFI and other
    > dictionaries
    
      - > Start here. Easy switching between dictionaries on the same
        > word.

  - > [DMF - Dictionnaire du moyen français](http://www.atilf.fr/dmf/),
    > 1330-1500, ATILF (CNRS & Université de Lorraine).
    
      - > Fundamental reference tool.

  - > [TLFi - Trésor de la langue française
    > informatisé](http://atilf.atilf.fr/), ATILF (CNRS & Université de
    > Lorraine).
    
      - > Dictionnaire de référence en français contemporain et
        > historique.

  - > [Émile Littré - Dictionnaire de la langue
    > française](http://www.littre.org), édition XML.
    
      - > Très utile notamment pour les termes techniques.

  - > [Dictionnaire de l’ancienne langue française et de tous ses
    > dialectes du IXe au XVe
    > siècle](http://www.micmap.org/dicfro/introduction/dictionnaire-godefroy),
    > par Frédéric Godefroy (1880-1895),
    > et [Complément](http://www.micmap.org/dicfro/introduction/complement-godefroy) (1895-1902).

  - > En complément: 
    
      - > *Dictionnaire historique de l’ancien langage françois, ou
        > Glossaire de la langue françoise depuis son origine jusqu’au
        > siècle de Louis XIV*, par Jean-Baptiste de la Curne de
        > Sainte-Palaye (1882). —
        > Sur [Archive.org](http://archive.org/search.php?query=Dictionnaire%20historique%20de%20l%27ancien%20langage%20fran%C3%A7ois) et
        > sur [Gallica](http://gallica.bnf.fr/Search?f_creator=La+Curne+de+Sainte+Palaye%2C+Jean+Baptiste+de+%281697-1781%29&ArianeWireIndex=index&q=la+curne+Dictionnaire+historique&lang=FR&n=15&p=1&f_nqamoyen=altoHQ).

  - > Abel Poitrineau, [Les Anciennes mesures locales du Sud-Ouest
    > d'après les tables de
    > conversion](https://books.google.com/books?id=RQP2c4uyz9oC),
    > Clermont-Ferrand, 1996.

  - > Pour les mots introuvables en français, penser aux dictionnaires
    > d’**occitan** et de **latin** (*infra*).

#### Au-delà

  - > [Dicfro](http://www.micmap.org/dicfro/liste-des-dictionnaires)
    
      - > Portail qui donne accès à de nombreuses ressources
        > lexicographiques historiques, aux glossaires de plusieurs
        > œuvres médiévales, ainsi qu’à quelques autres ressources de
        > moindre importance, y compris divers titres cités ci-dessous
        > dans le *Grand Corpus des Dictionnaires* (institutional access
        > required).

  - > [ARTFL - American research on the treasury of the French
    > language](http://clio.columbia.edu/catalog/519700)
    
      - > A full-text retrieval database of classical French writings;
        > users can create a dictionary and frequency count of words
        > used in a text, trace origins of words or phrases back through
        > the 17th century, etc. The database includes literary works,
        > political tracts, philosophical writings, and technical
        > treatises.

  - > [Gallica](http://gallica.bnf.fr) has many historical dictionaries,
    > often in image mode.
    
      - > Best accessed via this handy
        > [index](http://www.u-picardie.fr/LESCLaP/rey/tdm_telechargement_dictionnaires).

  - > [Grand Corpus des
    > Dictionnaires](http://www.classiques-garnier.com.janus.biu.sorbonne.fr/numerique-bases/index.php?module=App&action=FrameMain)
    > \[du 9e au 20e siècle\], Classiques Garnier. Sur abonnement.
    > (Institutional access required). Contient:
    
      - > Godefroy (Frédéric), *Dictionnaire de l’ancienne langue
        > française et de tous ses dialectes du 9e au 15e s.*
    
      - > La Curne de Sainte-Palaye, *Dictionnaire historique de
        > l’ancien langage français depuis son origine jusqu’au siècle
        > de Louis XIV*
    
      - > Huguet (Edmond), *Dictionnaire de la langue française du 16e
        > siècle*
    
      - > Estienne (Robert), *Dictionaire Francois-latin*, 1549
    
      - > Nicot (Jean), *Thrésor de la langue françoyse, tant ancienne
        > que moderne*, 1606
    
      - > Cotgrave (Randle), *A Dictionarie of the french and english
        > tongues*, 1611
    
      - > Ménage (Gilles), *Les Origines de la langue françoise*, 1650
    
      - > Richelet (Pierre), *Dictionnaire françois*, 1680
    
      - > *Dictionaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1687 \[Avant-première
        > 1\]
        
          - > de A à Aversion
    
      - > *Dictionaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1687 \[Avant-première
        > 2\]
        
          - > de A à Confiture
    
      - > *Dictionaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1687 \[Avant-première
        > 3\]
        
          - > de A à Neuf
    
      - > Furetière (Antoine), *Essai d’un Dictionaire universel*, 1687
    
      - > Furetière (Antoine), *Dictionaire universel*, 1690
    
      - > *Le* *Dictionnaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1694
        > \[1<sup>re</sup> édition\]
    
      - > Corneille (Thomas), *Le Dictionnaire des arts et des
        > sciences*, 1694 (the same is on Gallica, in image mode)
    
      - > Ménage (Gilles), *Dictionnaire étymologique ou Origines de la
        > langue françoise*, 1694
    
      - > *Nouveau* *Dictionnaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1718
        > \[2<sup>e</sup> édition\]
    
      - > *Dictionnaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1740 \[3<sup>e</sup>
        > édition\]
    
      - > *Dictionnaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1762
        > \[4<sup>e</sup>édition\]
    
      - > *Dictionnaire de l’Académie françoise*, 1798 \[5<sup>e</sup>
        > édition\]
    
      - > *Dictionnaire de l’Académie française*, 1835 \[6<sup>e</sup>
        > édition\]
    
      - > Barré (Louis), *Complément du* *Dictionnaire de l’Académie
        > française*, 1842
    
      - > *Dictionnaire de l’Académie française*, 1879 \[7<sup>e</sup>
        > édition\]
    
      - > *Dictionnaire de l’Académie française*, 1932-1935
        > \[8<sup>e</sup> édition\]

#### Occitan

  - > A critical assessment of the field: Josiane Ubaud, [Regards sur la
    > lexicographie occitane: de la richesse passée à la misère
    > endémique
    > contemporaine](http://www.josiane-ubaud.com/reg_lex.pdf), 2014.

  - > Jean Doujat, [Dictionnaire de la langue
    > toulousaine](https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k4170z.image),
    > 1641 (Toulouse 1895, reprint Marseille and Geneva 1974).

  - > Bernard Moreux, Robert Razou, [Les mots de Toulouse: lexique du
    > français
    > toulousain](https://books.google.fr/books?id=gktdAAAAMAAJ&q=bl%C3%A9+cussonner&dq=bl%C3%A9+cussonner&hl=fr&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjA0ZvXzorcAhVGXBQKHVFRCVgQ6AEILDAB),
    > Toulouse, 2000, 671 p.

  - > [Institut d'Estudis Occitans de París - Documents per l'estudi de
    > la lenga occitana](http://ieoparis.free.fr/delo.html)
    
      - > Links to many resources, including Raynouard, Levy, and the
        > following:
    
      - > P. A. Boissièr de Sauvatges, *Dictionnaire
        > languedocien-français*, 1756, 2 vols,
        > [A-E](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1914zkD3PGx3NWb4S7fGpQjWMPlFq7cO8),
        > [F-Z](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1BSHNJpnwzewaYlHudRtz--6UFMYXgUUQ).  
        > M. d’Hombres & G. Charvet, *Dictionnaire
        > languedocien-français*, 1881, 2 vols,
        > [A-E](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1uY2vVnAFr4G542Zf0qWv27cjA3dYIyAY),
        > [F-Z](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1i5P6CE39OoCxIbQnH6kWk23ysmKhbaNz)
    
      - > François Raynouard, [Lexique
        > roman](http://gallica.bnf.fr/Search?adva=1&adv=1&tri=&t_relation=cb31183402v&q=raynouard+lexique+roman)
        > (1844) \[Gallica\], and its supplement:  
        > Emil Levy, [Provenzalisches
        > Supplement-Wörterbuch](https://archive.org/search.php?query=Provenzalisches%20Supplement-W%C3%B6rterbuch)
        > (1894-1915) \[Internet Archive\].
    
      - > Maxime Lanusse, [De l'influence du dialecte gascon sur la
        > langue française](https://archive.org/details/fre_b1887388)
        > (Grenoble, 1893), with a chapter on vocabulary.

#### Poitevin/Saintongeais  

Important: a number of terms in the MS seem to belong specifically to
the dialect of Poitou and Saintonge, possibly pointing to the origin of
the author.

  - > Henri Beauchet-Filleau, [Essai sur le patois poitevin ou Petit
    > glossaire de quelques-uns des mots usités dans le canton de
    > Chef-Boutonne et les communes
    > voisines](https://books.google.com/books?id=jYACAAAAQAAJ),
    > Niort/Melle, 1864.

  - > L. Favre, [Glossaire du Poitou, de la Saintonge et de
    > l’Aunis](https://books.google.com/books?id=0DLgKk2XH0UC), Niort,
    > 1867.

  - > P. Jônain, [Dictionnaire du patois
    > saintongeais](https://archive.org/details/dictionnairedup00jngoog),
    > Royan, 1869.

  - > Abbé Rousseau, [Glossaire
    > poitevin](https://books.google.com/books?id=FbM-AAAAYAAJ&hl=fr&source=gbs_navlinks_s),
    > 2nd edn, Niort, 1869.

  - > Gabriel Lévrier, [Dictionnaire étymologique du patois
    > poitevin](https://books.google.fr/books?id=cgvMBVdgl9QC&pg=PA159&dq=chaple+poitevin&hl=fr&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj9rprbyZrcAhXE7xQKHSSvCwoQ6AEIPTAE#v=onepage&q&f=false),
    > Niort 1867.

  - > [Le Vocabulaire poitevin (1808–1825) de Lubin
    > Mauduyt](https://books.google.fr/books?id=_llbDAAAQBAJ&pg=PA71&lpg=PA71&dq=%22apiler%22+%22tasser%22&source=bl&ots=bLVCN7U2gU&sig=MzwiFAuq6OTXaGITavH12FzUh54&hl=fr&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjsnKSXvYvcAhXByRQKHWO6CgkQ6AEIKjAA#v=onepage&q&f=false),
    > éd. critique Pierre Rézeau (Tübingen 1994). Limited online access.

#### Latin

  - > [Dictionnaire
    > latin-français](http://www.micmap.org/dicfro/introduction/gaffiot),
    > par Félix Gaffiot (1934): latin classique.

  - > [Du Cange = Glossarium mediae et infimae
    > latinitatis](http://ducange.enc.sorbonne.fr/), par Charles du
    > Fresne, sieur du Cange *et al*. (éd. de 1883-1887), éd. numérique
    > École nationale des chartes.
    
      - > Dictionnaire monumental du latin médiéval (définitions en
        > latin), également riche en termes d’ancien français dans les
        > définitions comme dans les citations.

  - > [Logeion](http://logeion.uchicago.edu/levigatio) – combines Lewis
    > & Short, Gaffiot, and DMLBS

### MANUSCRITS, PALÉOGRAPHIE ET TEXTES ANCIENS

  - > Orientation générale: voir le répertoire en ligne sur le portail
    > [Ménestrel](http://www.menestrel.fr/spip.php?rubrique434)
    > (Médiévistes sur le Net: sources, travaux et références en
    > ligne).

  - > Ressources pour l’apprentissage: voir en particulier les dossiers
    > paléographiques en ligne de l’École des chartes,
    > [THELEME](http://theleme.enc.sorbonne.fr/) (Techniques pour
    > l’historien en ligne: études, manuels, exercices).

  - > [Newberry Library Paleography
    > Resources](http://www.newberry.org/paleography): The Center for
    > Renaissance Studies maintains a listing of online resources for
    > those interested in Paleography. The resources are arranged by
    > language

#### Abréviations

  - > [Dictionnaire des abréviations
    > françaises](http://theleme.enc.sorbonne.fr/dico) \[XII<sup>e</sup>-XVII<sup>e</sup> siècle\],
    > par M. Smith, École nationale des chartes.

#### Manuscrits numérisés 

  - > [Patrimoine
    > numérique](http://www.culture.gouv.fr/culture/mrt/numerisation/fr/f_02.htm)
    > contient le répertoire des collections publiques françaises
    > numérisées, notamment archives et bibliothèques, par le ministère
    > de la Culture.

  - > [Gallica](http://gallica.bnf.fr/html/editorial/manuscrits), la
    > bibliothèque numérique  de la BNF, offre un nombre désormais
    > considérable et toujours croissant de manuscrits. En cours,
    > l’ensemble des mss. précédemment microfilmés.

  - > [BVMM](http://bvmm.irht.cnrs.fr/) - Bibliothèque virtuelle des
    > manuscrits médiévaux: digital library of thousands of Mss. kept in
    > France outside the BNF. (See below, IRHT.)

  - > [Digital Scriptorium](http://www.scriptorium.columbia.edu/)
    > (manuscrits conservés aux USA) compte toujours parmi les plus
    > vastes et commodes corpus collectifs, y compris beaucoup de
    > manuscrits et documents en français. Moteur de recherche efficace.

#### Instituts de recherche historique

  - > [IRHT - Institut de recherche et d'histoire des
    > textes](http://www.irht.cnrs.fr/en/)
    
      - > The IRHT is an independent institute within the
        > [CNRS](http://www.cnrs.fr/index.php) (UPR 841). It is devoted
        > to fundamental research on medieval manuscripts and early
        > printed books. The textual histories of works written in the
        > major languages of the Mediterranean Basin (Latin, romance
        > languages, Hebrew, Greek, Coptic, Syriac, Arabic) are treated
        > from all aspects: the material support, writing, textual
        > content, decoration, iconography, diffusion, and reception.

  - > The IRHT website has essential databases of manuscripts in French,
    > Latin, Greek, Hebrew and Arabic.
    
      - > [Medium](http://medium.irht.cnrs.fr/) is the catalogue of
        > their massive collection of microfilms and photographs,
        > covering practically all medieval and Renaissance Mss in
        > France except the BNF. Many of those are now accessible as
        > digital images, in full or in part, in
        > [BVMM](http://bvmm.irht.cnrs.fr/).
    
      - > [Jonas](http://jonas.irht.cnrs.fr/) is the catalogue of French
        > texts.
    
      - > [BUDE](http://bude.irht.cnrs.fr/), slightly chaotic (work in
        > progress), has all sorts of information on humanists and their
        > texts.
    
      - > [Europa Humanistica](http://www.europahumanistica.org/) is a
        > networking effort, with resources including valuable
        > information on early [medical science and natural
        > history](http://www.europahumanistica.org/?-Medecins-et-naturalistes-avant-Linne-).

  - > [SISMEL - Società Internazionale per lo Studio del Medioevo
    > Latino](http://www.sismelfirenze.it/)
    
      - > SISMEL also has a vast array of interlinked resources (digital
        > and printed) on medieval Latin authors, manuscripts, and much
        > else, mainly accessible through the
        > [Mirabile](http://www.mirabileweb.it/)
            > portal
        
          - > [BISLAM](http://www.sismelfirenze.it/index.php/it/repertori/itemlist/category/67-bibliotheca-scriptorum-bislam)
            > (Bibliotheca Scriptorum Latinorum Medii Recentiorisque
            > Aevi) contains bio-bibliographical information on 13,000
            > Latin authors (or authors translated into Latin) before
            > 1536.
        
          - > [CALMA](http://www.sismelfirenze.it/index.php/it/repertori/itemlist/category/68-compendium-auctorum-calma)
            > (Compendium Auctorum Latinorum Medii Aevi, 500-1500) is a
            > general repertory of medieval authors (in print, not
            > online).

  - > [Monumenta Germaniae Historica](http://www.dmgh.de/)

  - > [Istituto storico italiano](http://www.isime.it/index.php)

#### Medieval texts

  - > [Corpus de la littérature médiévale des origines au 15e
    > siècle.](http://www.columbia.edu/cgi-bin/cul/resolve?clio10931173)
    > This database includes more than 900 full texts from the Middle
    > Ages, including chansons de geste, poetry, theater and religious
    > texts.

### IDENTIFYING EARLY BOOKS ONLINE

See also above, [IRHT](http://www.irht.cnrs.fr/en/) and
[SISMEL/Mirabile](http://www.mirabileweb.it/)

  - > [USTC - Universal Short Title Catalogue](http://www.ustc.ac.uk/)
    
      - > General catalogue of pre-1600 European books. Includes links
        > to digitized copies whenever possible.

  - > [J.-C. Brunet, Manuel du libraire et de l’amateur de
    > livres](http://catalogue.bnf.fr/servlet/RechercheEquation;jsessionid=F2E05E38A032D4F393F95B3A1A9B95D8?TexteCollection=HGARSTUVWXYZ1DIECBMJNQLOKP&TexteTypeDoc=DESNFPIBTMCJOV&Equation=IDP%3Dcb301695339&host=catalogue).
    > Paris, 1860-65, 6 vols.
    
      - > Remains an essential reference tool for early (and not so
        > early) editions. The digital version on Gallica is searchable,
        > but only volume by volume.

  - > [Worldcat](http://www.worldcat.org/?lang=en)
    
      - > The largest meta search interface for library catalogues.

  - > [KvK - Karlsruhe Virtual
    > Catalogue](http://www.ubka.uni-karlsruhe.de/kvk_en.html)
    
      - > Another meta search interface for more than 500 million books
        > and serials in library and book trade catalogs worldwide, with
        > country-by-country query filters. Includes specific catalogs
        > for 16th-c. books in Italy & Germany.

  - > [Bibliographie des éditions parisiennes du 16ème
    > siècle](http://bp16.bnf.fr/)
    
      - > Ce site contient dans un premier temps les 10 000 notices des
        > cinq volumes de l’*Inventaire chronologique des éditions
        > parisiennes du 16e siècle*, imprimés entre 1972 et 2004 et
        > couvrant les années 1501 à 1540, rédigés pour les quatre
        > premiers par [Brigitte
        > Moreau](http://data.bnf.fr/11916755/brigitte_moreau/)
        > (1930-1994). Les notices des éditions publiées de 1541 à 1550
        > feront l'objet d'un prochain chargement.
    
      - > An online bibliography of Parisian editions from the 16th
        > century. It currently only contains 1501-1540, but it will be
        > progressively augmented until it covers the entire sixteenth
        > century.

### ARTS AND TECHNIQUE - VOCABULARY

  - > Macquer, Phillipe (1720-1770), [Dictionnaire raisonné universel
    > des arts et métiers, contenant l'histoire, la description, la
    > police des fabriques et manufactures de France et des pays
    > étrangers](http://find.galegroup.com/mome/infomark.do?sort=DateAscend&prodId=MOME&tabID=T001&searchType=AdvancedSearchForm&type=search&currentPosition=1&version=1.0&searchResultsPerPage=10&userGroupName=columbiau&queryId=Locale%28en%2CUS%2C%29%3AFQE%3D%28RN%2CNone%2C10%29U104264857%24&source=gale)
    > (Lyon, A. Leroy, 1801)

  - > Bertrand, J. E.., [Real Colegio de Farmacia de San Fernando
    > (Madrid), Descriptions des arts et
    > métiers](http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=ucm.5315939358;view=1up;seq=6),
    > nouvelle édition... augmentée.... Neuchatel: Société Typographique
    > (1771-83).

  - > [Dictionnaire universel françois et latin, vulgairement appellé
    > Dictionnaire de
    > Trévoux](http://www.cnrtl.fr/dictionnaires/anciens/trevoux/)

  - > [Encylopedie](http://encyclopedie.uchicago.edu/node/176) - The
    > ARTFL Project, University of Chicago, searchable

  - > [Encyclopedie - English
    > translation](http://quod.lib.umich.edu/d/did/) (incomplete)

  - > ArtLex: An easy search engine to search an array of dictionaries
    > on English terms relating to art, including alchemy and more.

  - > [Vocabulary of current casting terms and
    > processes](http://www.engineersedge.com/casting_definition.htm)
    > (from Engineersedge.com)

  - > Dumas, Jean Baptiste A., [Traité de chimie, appliquée aux
    > arts](https://books.google.com/books?id=pWsDAAAAQAAJ&pg=PA507&dq=trousseau+sable+cloche&hl=fr&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwipmNyA47nNAhXKqB4KHYJBC1cQ6AEINDAE#v=onepage&q=trousseau%20&f=false),
    > Bruxelles, 1833.  
    > Interesting section on founding with descriptions of different
    > earths, including those used in Toulouse, around p. 500.

  - > Gay, Victor, [Glossaire archéologique du Moyen Age et de la
    > Renaissance](https://archive.org/search.php?query=gay%20glossaire),
    > Paris, 1887-1928, 2 vols.
    
      - > Vol. 1 only on [Google
        > Books](http://books.google.com/books?id=hUFPTJx_bj8C&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q&f=false).
        > A remarkable dictionary with many words for everyday items
        > from archival documents.

  - > F.J.M. Wijnekus, E.F.P.H. Wijnekus, Dictionary of the Printing and
    > Allied Industries, in six languages…, 2nd edn, Amsterdam, 1983.

  - > Jacquart, Danielle. *Lexique de La langue scientifique:
    > astrologie, mathématiques, médecine*. Paris, 1997.
    
      - > Columbia Library: Offsite Q123 .J336 1997

  - > Sachs, Hans & Jost Amman, *Das Standebüch (Book of Trades)*,
    > Frankfurt am Main, 1568. Woodcut illustrations of various
    > professions accompanied by a short poem. See Wikimedia.

  - > Trench, Lucy, *Materials and Techniques in the Decorative Arts: An
    > Illustrated Dictionary*, London, 2000. E-Book.

  - > Zedler, Johann Heinrich, [Grosses vollständiges Universal-Lexicon
    > aller Wissenchafften und
    > Künste](http://www.zedler-lexikon.de/index.html). Leipzig,
    > 1731-1754.

  - > [B.
    > Guineau](http://www.brepols.net/Pages/ShowAuthor.aspx?lid=113036),
    > [Glossaire des matériaux de la couleur et des termes techniques
    > employés dans les recettes de couleurs
    > anciennes](http://www.brepols.net/Pages/ShowAuthor.aspx?lid=113036),
    > only in print.

#### Other resources

  - > [BCIN - Réseau d’information sur la conservation - Conservation
    > Information Network](http://www.bcin.ca/)
    
      - > The bibliographic database of the Conservation Information
        > Network (BCIN) provides access to over 200,000 bibliographic
        > citations for conservation literature. BCIN includes citations
        > from the first 34 volumes of the Art and Archaeology Technical
        > Abstracts (AATA) published between 1955 and 1997, technical
        > reports, conference proceedings, journal articles, books,
        > audiovisual materials, theses, software and machine-readable
        > files and unpublished materials. In French and English.

  - > [Getty Research Portal](http://portal.getty.edu/portal/landing)
    
      - > Access to digitized art history publications, rare books, and
        > related literature.

  - > [Getty Art & Architectural Thesaurus -- for technical
    > terms](http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/aat/)

  - > [MetPublications - Metropolitan Museum of Art Publications
    > online](http://www.metmuseum.org/research/metpublications).
    
      - > Online database of research publications from the Metropolitan
        > Museum of Art. Many out of print catalogs are available to
        > download in full.

  - > [EEBO - Early English Books
    > Online](http://eebo.chadwyck.com.ezproxy.cul.columbia.edu/home)
    
      - > A digitized version of the Early English Books microfilm
        > collection, this database contains full-text page images of of
        > about 100,000 of the 1250,000 titles listed in Pollard &
        > Redgrave’s Short-Title Catalogue (1475-1640) and Wing’s
        > Short-Title Catalogue (1641-1700) and their revised editions,
        > as well as the Thomason Tracts (1640-1661) collection. These
        > include English translations of Alessio Piemontese’s book of
        > secrets and Hugh Plat’s *Jewel House of Nature*.

  - > [Bibliothèque historique de Mines Paris
    > Tech](http://patrimoine.mines-paristech.fr/)
    
      - > La bibliothèque de l’École des mines de Paris (Mines Paris
        > Tech) vient d’ouvrir sa bibliothèque numérique patrimoniale,
        > contenant entre autres des ouvrages sur les arts de la mine
        > depuis le XVe siècle.

  - > Beaulieu, Michèle. *Dictionnaire des sculpteurs français du Moyen
    > Age*. Paris, 1992.  
    > \[Columbia Library: Avery (Non-Circulating) AC So289 No.19

  - > Cassan, H. “Nomination des consuls de la ville de Béziers en
    > 1332”, in *Bulletin de la Société archéologique de Béziers*,
    > 1839, p. 43-58 (55-70 in the
    > [PDF](https://archive.org/details/bulletin02bzgoog)). Contains a
    > list of professions and trades, useful to check Occitan names.

  - > [Speelberg, Femke, French goldsmiths’ ornamental
    > prints](http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/blak/hd_blak.htm) (all
    > that is left of 16th- and 17th-century goldsmiths’ work in France)
    > in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (with useful
    > bibliography)

  - > [Europeana](http://www.europeana.eu/portal/) - archival database
    > of texts, images, objects, images, and more. “All across Europe,
    > thousands of museums, galleries and archives are digitizing their
    > collections - creating virtual copies of their texts, imagery and
    > objects that can be stored on local servers or in the cloud. Once
    > these collections are made public online, we work hard to make
    > sure other people can find and use them. For change. For ideas.
    > For progress.”

  - > [History of the Accademia di San
    > Luca](http://www.nga.gov/casva/accademia/search_eng.shtm) - *The
    > History of the Accademia di San Luca, c. 1590–1635: Documents from
    > the Archivio di Stato di Roma* brings together a body of largely
    > unpublished notarial records from the Trenta Notai Capitolini
    > (TNC) found in the Archivio di Stato di Roma (ASR), many
    > previously thought lost, concerning the institutional history of
    > the Accademia. First mentioned in a brief from Pope Gregory XIII
    > of 1577, a little over a decade after the conclusion of the last
    > session of the Council of Trent, the Accademia di San Luca was
    > intended to serve the educational, social, professional, and
    > confraternal needs of the painters, sculptors, and architects of
    > Rome.

  - > Christine Göttler, et al., [Materialized Identities. Objects,
    > Affects and Effects in Early Modern
    > Culture, 1450-1750](http://www.materializedidentities.com/)

  - > Sven Dupré and Christine Göttler, eds., [*The Worlds and
    > Possessions of the Portuguese Merchant-Banker Emmanuel Ximenez in
    > early seventeenth-century
    > Antwerp*](http://ximenez.unibe.ch/material/)

|  |  |
|  |  |
|  |  |

#### **The National Archive (TNA) currency converter:**

  - > <http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/currency/default.asp#mid> -
    > The TNA provides the following info, re: calculations and
    > conversions: “The data used to provide the calculations for the
    > currency converter has been collated from original documents and
    > official statistics, and the survey of material used has been as
    > comprehensive as possible. However, the results of the
    > calculations are intended to be a general guide to historic
    > values, rather than a categorical statement of fact.
    > Approximations are from 2005.”

  - > <http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/currency/disclaimer.htm>

#### Videos and reconstruction

  - > [Sandcasting with Philip
    > White](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kmb5tivQ_bY) — multi part

  - > [Sandcasting with "Delft
    > Clay"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K0sCDTRwMwg) (actually sand
    > and "magistry", i.e., binding medium)

  - > [Part 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K0sCDTRwMwg): making the
    > mold — [Part 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gtrPX3jEJC4):
    > casting the metal — Part 3: missing

  - > [Casting a pewter stool at the beach](http://vimeo.com/9498805)

  - > [Making
    > paper](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O6KmzuULPmQ&feature=youtu.be&t=40m45s)
    > — From the Schweizerisches Papiermuseum

  - > [Chancery
    > Papermaking](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-PmfdV_cZU) -
    > University of Iowa Library

  - > Sword and scabbard making:
    > <http://www.yeoldegaffers.com/project_scabbard.asp>

  - > [Raising a silver
    > vessel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JaqmzKFWDEI) – From the
    > gathering of scrap silver to the raising and polishing of a coffee
    > pot (18th century\!). The raising of vessels is what most
    > silversmith shops would normally have spent most of their time
    > doing, but our author-practitioner never even mentions it, which
    > may indicate that he was not a goldsmith.

  - > Harvard Art Museums — silversmith Adam Whitney made a
    > reconstruction of the silver deer rhyton that survives as a
    > fragment in the collection:
    > <https://aw-metalsmith.com/deer-reconstruction>.

  - > [Working with Venetian Style
    > Glass](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sSBY6Lc2-hU&t=3s) — A film
    > by glassmaker Ian Hankey in which he discusses the value of
    > reconstruction.

  - > [Lions, Dragons, Other
    > Beasts](http://www.bgc.bard.edu/gallery/gallery-at-bgc/past-exhibitions/past-exhibitions-aquamanilia.html)
    > — Goldsmith Ubaldo Vitali makes a medieval aquamanile.

  - > The C[hymistry of Isaac Newton
    > Project](http://webapp1.dlib.indiana.edu/newton/) —
    > reconstructions of alchemical
    > experiments.

  - > <http://www.artandarchitecture.org.uk/fourpaintings/daddi/index.html>
    > — Short films about painting techniques (panel preparation,
    > underdrawing, painting and gilding).

  - > [Parallel
    > Practices](http://www.craftscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/parallel-practices/),
    > Crafts Council and Kings College London
    
      - > The value of craft skills to facilitate innovation in science,
        > technology and medicine is increasingly recognised. Parallel
        > Practices a 2014 pilot led by Crafts Council in partnership
        > with Cultural Institute at King’s College, London,
        > demonstrated the positive healthcare impact of research and
        > development collaborations between makers and medical
        > professionals. The project stimulated learning and innovation
        > through a focus on the body, materials and processes that
        > inform clinical outcomes and artistic practice. Each residency
        > involved a team of at least one maker and one medical and
        > scientific academic.

#### Colormaking

  - > [Kremer Pigments documentary
    > (German)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SaMtuUYppjU)

  - > [Technical Art History Website (all about
    > pigments)](http://www.artcons.udel.edu/about/kress)

  - > CAMEO: Conservation & Art Materials Encyclopedia Online:
    > <http://cameo.mfa.org/wiki/Main_Page>

  - > Color Context Database - access to 5500 colormaking recipes. Sign
    > up here: <https://www.colourcontext.be/en/app/>

  - > Closer to Van Eyck website with information about techniques:
    > <http://closertovaneyck.kikirpa.be/>

#### Miscellaneous sources for MATERIALS research

  - > Johan Gottschalk Wallerius, *Mineralogie, oder mineralreich: von
    > ihm eingeteilt und beschrieben:  *[Latin
    > edition, 1752](https://books.google.com/books?id=NrtRAAAAcAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=Johan+Gottschalk+wallerius&hl=en&sa=X&ei=gUJqVeu2FYyZyAT59oLYAw&ved=0CCwQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q=Johan%20Gottschalk%20wallerius&f=false)
    > and [German
    > edition, 1763](https://books.google.com/books?id=8h8-AAAAcAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=Johan+Gottschalk+wallerius&hl=en&sa=X&ei=dUFqVeHODdipyATa4YD4AQ&ved=0CD0Q6AEwBg#v=onepage&q=Johan%20Gottschalk%20wallerius&f=false)

  - > Johann Georg Kruenitz, [* Oekonomische Encyklopaedie, oder
    > algemeines System der Stadt- Haus- und
    > Landwirthschaft*](http://www.kruenitz1.uni-trier.de/) (1773-1853)

#### Distillation

  - > Information on distilling, eau de vie, pictures of stills
    > (alembics) and retorts: Philipp Ulstadt. [*Coelum Philosophorum
    > seu de Secretis Naturae
    > liber*](https://books.google.com/books?id=PLrX8DiTBSgC&printsec=frontcover&dq=inauthor:%22Philipp+ULSTADT%22&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CC4Q6AEwAmoVChMIhfqexsSKxgIVRBqMCh06GQAT#v=onepage&q=cornum&f=false),
    > 1525.
