## Creation of the edition 

This digital critical Edition and English translation of the French
manuscript, Ms. Fr. 640, held by the Bibliothèque nationale de France
(BnF), presents a rich and unique sixteenth-century technical text
in French transcription and English translation for the first time, and
situates its contents in their material and historical context. The
manuscript provides important insights into the material, technical, and
intellectual worlds of the late sixteenth century, and brings a better
understanding of how and why nature was investigated, used in art, and
collected and appreciated in early modern Europe. The Making and Knowing
Project has created the Edition through a series of collaborative
workshops, courses, and conferences that have involved students, craft
practitioners, artists, scholars of the humanities and social sciences,
natural and computer scientists, and practitioner-scholars from the
emerging field of the digital humanities.

The first stage of transcription, translation, and encoding of the
manuscript was carried out in a series of paleography and text workshops
(2014-2018) that brought together graduate students (already in
possession of advanced French) to learn to read middle French script
through transcription exercises and then through intensive transcription
and translation of Ms. Fr. 640. Students in the Making and Knowing
Project’s laboratory seminars from 2014 to 2018 used the transcriptions
and translations to investigate the materials and techniques contained
in the manuscript. Vid. 1: M\&K Lab video. These students produced
essays that featured their research on texts and objects, as well as
their experiments in reconstructing Ms. Fr. 640’s processes. The essays
explain entries in Ms. Fr. 640 and provide contextual information for
the manuscript more generally. They can be accessed by clicking the XX
icon next to the relevant entries on the “Folio” pages, or from the
Research and Resources menu. The student essays were edited extensively
by members of the Making and Knowing Project team, after which scholars
participating in the annual Working Group Meeting commented upon them.
They were edited again in 2019 by the Making and Knowing senior
editorial team. The Research apparatus of the Edition also includes
dozens of research essays authored by Working Group members and invited
collaborators that discuss different aspects of the context of Ms. Fr.
640. These essays can be accessed on the Research Essays page. Several
additional features provide assistance to readers, including editorial
comments (signalled by a red asterisk in the manuscript text), a
glossary (accessible as an option in the drop-down menu within the
viewing panes), a complete bibliography, and a list of all 928 “recipe”
or entry headings (titles) in the manuscript. This index of recipes also
allows the reader to explore fourteen categories of encoding that the
Project deemed meaningful in providing insight into the manuscript:
animal, body part, currency, environment, material, measurement,
medical, music, personal name, place, plant, profession, sensory, and
tool. In addition, manuscript entries can be explored through filtering
by twenty-six material and process categories devised by the Project.
These categories and their definitions are listed along the left side of
the Entries page.

The final component of the creation of the Edition was prototyping of
the digital components in digital humanities courses held by the Making
and Knowing Project at Columbia University, and development of the
Edition platform by the Project Digital Team. For more information on
making the Edition, see Smith, “Making the Edition,” ann\_329\_ie\_19.
