**Peer review**

This Edition and its research apparatus have been created collectively,
and have been the objects of intense collective review, discussion, and
iterated examination and revision. Because of its format and extensive
scope—three versions of the manuscript and more than 100 research
essays—it was not sent out for peer review. Instead, a form of “open
review” was instituted: each of the student essays was edited at least
three times by different members of the Making and Knowing Team and then
read and commented upon by a scholar within whose expertise the subject
of the essay fell. After this, students had an opportunity to revise the
essay, and, finally, the essay was edited in a final editorial campaign
by the Making and Knowing Team (Clément Godbarge, Pamela Smith, Tillmann
Taape, Tianna Uchacz). The essays authored by invited scholars were
workshopped among all authors at a collective co-writing workshop in
2019, and also underwent editorial review by Making and Knowing team
members. For more information on open review see,
<http://mcpress.media-commons.org/open-review/files/2012/06/MediaCommons_Open_Review_White_Paper_final.pdf>.

The extremely diverse and often obscure materials and techniques treated
in the essays would have presented a problem for conventional peer
review because a large number of reviewers with diverse areas of
expertise would have been needed. Instead, critical oversight was built
into the annual Working Group Meeting, when scholars were selected for
their expertise in the subjects of the essays produced in a given year,
and were assigned a number of essays, commenting formally on the essays
in the three-day meeting. The Project also wished to build into the
collaborative structure the opportunity presented by this intriguing
primary source for students to interact around substantive questions
with accomplished scholars. This was achieved in the process of review
and critique at the annual Working Group Meetings. The Project believes
this solution not only succeeded in integrating phases of pedagogy and
research in an extremely productive manner and provided valuable
opportunities for graduate students, but also resulted in a more
thorough (and pedagogically useful) review of the diverse contents of
the essays than might have been provided by conventional methods of peer
review.

While no method of peer review is foolproof, the Project believes that
its process of review and revision maintained quality and consistency in
its expansive research apparatus. As the practice of historical
scholarship changes, whether through collective research and authorship
or through new approaches such as digital methods and laboratory
research on historical questions, it seems necessary for the practices
and parameters for scholarly peer review also to evolve.
