# About the Making and Knowing Project

The Making and Knowing Project
([www.makingandknowing.or](http://www.makingandknowing.ort)g), founded
in 2014 by Pamela H. Smith, is a research and pedagogical initiative in
the Center for Science and Society
([https://scienceandsociety.columbia.edu](https://scienceandsociety.columbia.edu/))
at Columbia University.

The Project explores the intersections between historical craft making
and scientific knowing. Drawing on techniques from both laboratory and
archival research as well as studio practice and the digital humanities,
the Making and Knowing Project aims to cross the science/humanities
divide.

VIDEO - TheLab-01-IntroductiontotheMakingandKnowingProject

\<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/384070384" width="640"
height="360" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen"
allowfullscreen\>\</iframe\>

The creation of the Digital Critical Edition of Ms. Fr. 640 has been the
Project’s primary endeavor since 2014. This has shaped the Project’s
methodology of fusing pedagogy with research, using a focused research
object (Ms. Fr. 640) to teach historical, hands-on, and digital research
methods while generating research outputs.

IMAGE (showing collaboration)

The Edition of Ms. Fr. 640 can shed light not only on what kind of
knowledge the manuscript’s anonymous author possessed about techniques
and materials, but also—more broadly—how this author-practitioner’s work
of *making* was related to *knowing*.

Indeed, the overarching theme of the Project and its work on the Edition
has been to show the ways in which making is an epistemic activity. In
other words, making is a form of knowing, rather than simply an applied
form of a higher type of knowledge.

For more about the Project, please explore:

  - > The Project’s website
    > ([www.makingandknowing.or](http://www.makingandknowing.ort)g)

  - > Smith, Making the Edition
