# Sponsors

The Critical Digital Edition of Ms. Fr. 640 would not have been possible
without a wide network of supporters. The Making and Knowing Project
gratefully acknowledges the support of countless individuals,
collaborators, federal grants, internal Columbia University awards,
faculty research funds, institutional collaborators, and grants and
gifts from foundations and private donors—some listed below.

**The Center for Science and Society**, Columbia University.

**Faculty of Arts and Sciences**, Columbia University.

**Columbia University Libraries**, Digital Scholarship Division.

**Eugene S. Ferguson Prize** by the Society for the History of
Technology for outstanding and original reference work that supports
future scholarship in the history of technology. Awarded to the Project
in October 2019.

**The National Endowment for the Humanities**, Grant \#RQ-249842-16,
“Craft Techniques and Knowledge Systems in a 16th-Century Artist’s
Manuscript: An Open-Access Critical Edition and Translation,” 2016-20.

**The National Science Foundation**, Grant \#1430843, “The Role of Craft
Skill in Scientific Practice,” 2017–20.

**The National Science Foundation**, Grant \#1734596, “The Role of Tacit
Knowledge in Experimentation,” 2014–17.

**The National Science Foundation**, Conference Grant \#1656227,
“Workshop: Translation and Encoding for the Making and Knowing
Project,” 2017–18.

**Luce Foundation**, Higher Education Grant, 2017–20.

**The Chemical Heritage Foundation**, Making and Knowing Project
Postdoctoral Scholars, 2014–17.

**Gerda Henkel Foundation**, AZ 40/F/16: Making and Knowing Project
Postdoctoral Research Scholar, 2017–18.

**Collaboratory Grant**, “Transforming Texts: Computational Approaches
to Text Analysis and Visualization,” 2017–20.

**Collaboratory Seed Grant**, Columbia University, “What is a Book for
the 21st Century?” seed funding, 2016–18.

**Provost’s Hybrid Learning Course Redesign and Delivery**, “What is a
Book in the 21st Century? Working with Historical Texts in a Digital
Environment,” 2016–17.

**The Maurice I. Parisier Foundation**

**The Florence Gould Foundation**

**Gladys Krieble Delmas Foundation**

**Howard and Natalie Shawn**
